README.md, before:

# 11ty-pst (eleventy-plugin-typst)

An Eleventy plugin that enables you to write content in [Typst](https://typst.app/) format with automatic dual HTML/PDF output generation.

[![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/npm-CB3837?style=for-the-badge&logo=npm&logoColor=white)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eleventy-plugin-typst)
[![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-100000?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/uwni/11ty-pst)

## Installation

```bash
npm install eleventy-plugin-typst
# or
bun add eleventy-plugin-typst
```

## Usage

### Basic Setup

Add the plugin to your `.eleventy.js` or `eleventy.config.mjs`:

```javascript
import eleventyPluginTypst from "eleventy-plugin-typst";

export default function(eleventyConfig) {
  eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst);
}
```

### Configuration Options

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  workspace: ".",              // Typst workspace directory
  targets: ["html", "pdf"],    // Output formats
  collection: "posts",         // Collection name for generated pages
  fontPaths: ["fonts"],        // Paths to custom fonts
  htmlOutputRange: "body",     // HTML output range: "body" or "all"
  backend: "typst-ts-node",    // Backend type (see below)
  typstPath: undefined,        // Path to typst executable (for CLI backends)
});
```

### Backend Options

The plugin supports multiple backend engines for Typst compilation:

#### 1. **typst-ts-node** (Default)

Uses `@myriaddreamin/typst-ts-node-compiler` for fast, native compilation with full HTML support.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-ts-node"  // Default, can be omitted
});
```

**Pros:**
- Full HTML and PDF support
- Fast native compilation
- Advanced query capabilities
- No external dependencies

**Cons:**
- Requires native Node.js bindings
- Larger package size

#### 2. **typst-cli-system**

Uses your system-installed Typst CLI.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-cli-system",
  targets: ["html", "pdf"]  // Both formats supported
});
```

**Pros:**
- Uses your existing Typst installation
- Always up-to-date with latest Typst version
- Smaller package size
- Full HTML and PDF support (requires Typst CLI with HTML support)

**Cons:**
- Requires Typst to be installed separately (`brew install typst`, `cargo install typst-cli`, etc.)
- Query capabilities may be limited compared to typst-ts-node
- **Note:** HTML output requires Typst built with `--features html` (not available in all distributions)

#### 3. **typst-cli-custom**

Uses a custom Typst CLI at a specified path.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-cli-custom",
  typstPath: "/path/to/custom/typst",
  targets: ["html", "pdf"]  // Both formats supported
});
```

**Pros:**
- Use a specific Typst version
- Useful for CI/CD environments
- Control over Typst binary location
- Full HTML and PDF support (if Typst CLI version supports it)

**Cons:**
- Same limitations as `typst-cli-system`
- Must specify `typstPath` option

### Template Formats

Add `"typ"` to your template formats in your Eleventy config:

```javascript
export const config = {
  templateFormats: [
    "html",
    "njk",
    "typ"  // Add this line
  ]
};
```

### Writing Typst Files

Create `.typ` files in your content directory. The plugin supports frontmatter through Typst templates:

```typst
#import "/node_modules/eleventy-plugin-typst/typst/template.typ": template-base

#show: template-base.with(
  title: "My Blog Post",
  tags: ("typst", "eleventy", "blog"),
  description: "A blog post written in Typst"
)

= My Blog Post

This is my blog post written in Typst!

== Features

- Automatic HTML generation for web display
- PDF generation for downloads/archives
- Template-based frontmatter configuration
- Custom font loading
- Date and metadata injection
```

### Customize Your Own Template
You very likely want to use different template for different compilation target like html or pdf, do this

```typst
#import "/node_modules/eleventy-plugin-typst/typst/template.typ": template-base, compilation-mode

#let my-template = template-base.with(
  renderer: if compilation-mode == "html" {
    import "html-output.typ": as-html-output
    as-html-output
  } else {
    import "pdf-output.typ": as-pdf-output
    as-pdf-output
  }
)
```

then you can use your own `my-template` function rather than the default one.

### Automatic Dual Output

The plugin automatically generates both HTML and PDF versions of each `.typ` file:

- **HTML**: For web display (uses your layout templates)
- **PDF**: Available at `/archives/{filename}.pdf`

On your frontmatter, use `gen-html: bool` and `gen-pdf: bool` to control these behaviour, like

```typ
#show: post-template.with(
  title: "About",
  layout: "layouts/post.webc",
  gen-pdf: false,
)
```

### Available Variables

Your Typst files have access to these variables:

- `url`: Page URL from Eleventy metadata
- `date`: Page date in ISO format
- `source`: Input file path
- `fileSlug`: File slug
- `buildDate`: Build timestamp
- `commitSha`: Git commit SHA (if available)

## Credits
- 11ty: https://www.11ty.dev
- Typst: https://typst.app
- typst.ts: https://github.com/Myriad-Dreamin/typst.ts

Commit message:

Add support for custom Typst CLI arguments in typst-cli backend; validate unsupported options in typst-ts-node backend

README.md, after:

# 11ty-pst (eleventy-plugin-typst)

An Eleventy plugin that enables you to write content in [Typst](https://typst.app/) format with automatic dual HTML/PDF output generation.

[![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/npm-CB3837?style=for-the-badge&logo=npm&logoColor=white)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eleventy-plugin-typst)
[![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-100000?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/uwni/11ty-pst)

## Installation

```bash
npm install eleventy-plugin-typst
# or
bun add eleventy-plugin-typst
```

## Usage

### Basic Setup

Add the plugin to your `.eleventy.js` or `eleventy.config.mjs`:

```javascript
import eleventyPluginTypst from "eleventy-plugin-typst";

export default function(eleventyConfig) {
  eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst);
}
```

### Configuration Options

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  workspace: ".",              // Typst workspace directory
  targets: ["html", "pdf"],    // Output formats
  collection: "posts",         // Collection name for generated pages
  fontPaths: ["fonts"],        // Paths to custom fonts
  htmlOutputRange: "body",     // HTML output range: "body" or "all"
  backend: "typst-ts-node",    // Backend type (see below)
  typstPath: undefined,        // Path to typst executable (for CLI backends)
  typstArgs: [],               // Custom Typst CLI arguments (CLI backends only)
});
```

### Backend Options

The plugin supports multiple backend engines for Typst compilation:

#### 1. **typst-ts-node** (Default)

Uses `@myriaddreamin/typst-ts-node-compiler` for fast, native compilation with full HTML support.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-ts-node"  // Default, can be omitted
});
```

**Pros:**
- Full HTML and PDF support
- Fast native compilation
- Advanced query capabilities
- No external dependencies

**Cons:**
- Requires native Node.js bindings
- Larger package size

#### 2. **typst-cli-system**

Uses your system-installed Typst CLI.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-cli-system",
  targets: ["html", "pdf"]  // Both formats supported
});
```

**Pros:**
- Uses your existing Typst installation
- Always up-to-date with latest Typst version
- Smaller package size
- Full HTML and PDF support (requires Typst CLI with HTML support)

**Cons:**
- Requires Typst to be installed separately (`brew install typst`, `cargo install typst-cli`, etc.)
- Query capabilities may be limited compared to typst-ts-node
- **Note:** HTML output requires Typst built with `--features html` (not available in all distributions)

#### 3. **typst-cli-custom**

Uses a custom Typst CLI at a specified path.

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-cli-custom",
  typstPath: "/path/to/custom/typst",
  targets: ["html", "pdf"]  // Both formats supported
});
```

**Pros:**
- Use a specific Typst version
- Useful for CI/CD environments
- Control over Typst binary location
- Full HTML and PDF support (if Typst CLI version supports it)

**Cons:**
- Same limitations as `typst-cli-system`
- Must specify `typstPath` option

### Custom Typst CLI Arguments

For CLI backends (`typst-cli-system` and `typst-cli-custom`), you can pass custom arguments to the Typst compiler using the `typstArgs` option:

```javascript
eleventyConfig.addPlugin(eleventyPluginTypst, {
  backend: "typst-cli-system",
  workspace: ".",
  fontPaths: ["fonts"],
  typstArgs: [
    "--ppi", "300",           // Set custom PPI for rasterization
    "--jobs", "4",            // Limit parallel compilation jobs
  ]
});
```

**Note:** Custom arguments are added with highest priority and can override default arguments. The `typstArgs` option is **not supported** by the `typst-ts-node` backend and will throw an error if used.

### Template Formats

Add `"typ"` to your template formats in your Eleventy config:

```javascript
export const config = {
  templateFormats: [
    "html",
    "njk",
    "typ"  // Add this line
  ]
};
```

### Writing Typst Files

Create `.typ` files in your content directory. The plugin supports frontmatter through Typst templates:

```typst
#import "/node_modules/eleventy-plugin-typst/typst/template.typ": template-base

#show: template-base.with(
  title: "My Blog Post",
  tags: ("typst", "eleventy", "blog"),
  description: "A blog post written in Typst"
)

= My Blog Post

This is my blog post written in Typst!

== Features

- Automatic HTML generation for web display
- PDF generation for downloads/archives
- Template-based frontmatter configuration
- Custom font loading
- Date and metadata injection
```

### Customize Your Own Template
You very likely want to use different template for different compilation target like html or pdf, do this

```typst
#import "/node_modules/eleventy-plugin-typst/typst/template.typ": template-base, compilation-mode

#let my-template = template-base.with(
  renderer: if compilation-mode == "html" {
    import "html-output.typ": as-html-output
    as-html-output
  } else {
    import "pdf-output.typ": as-pdf-output
    as-pdf-output
  }
)
```

then you can use your own `my-template` function rather than the default one.

### Automatic Dual Output

The plugin automatically generates both HTML and PDF versions of each `.typ` file:

- **HTML**: For web display (uses your layout templates)
- **PDF**: Available at `/archives/{filename}.pdf`

On your frontmatter, use `gen-html: bool` and `gen-pdf: bool` to control these behaviour, like

```typ
#show: post-template.with(
  title: "About",
  layout: "layouts/post.webc",
  gen-pdf: false,
)
```

### Available Variables

Your Typst files have access to these variables:

- `url`: Page URL from Eleventy metadata
- `date`: Page date in ISO format
- `source`: Input file path
- `fileSlug`: File slug
- `buildDate`: Build timestamp
- `commitSha`: Git commit SHA (if available)

## Credits
- 11ty: https://www.11ty.dev
- Typst: https://typst.app
- typst.ts: https://github.com/Myriad-Dreamin/typst.ts
